Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we've been talking
about multisets and the algebra of multisets try
to position this a little bit more centrally
within mathematics today I'm going to carry
on with that and talk about the algebra of these
multi sets in particular we're going to introduce
some additional interesting new notation that
will be very useful for a number of different
topics ok so our basic setup is we're considering
m set of n here n is a natural number which is
fixed and msn n refers to the type of em sets
from an with K elements in other words km sets
from n where the K is arbitrary just a natural
number or possibly 0 ok so how do we get out our
new notation well let's recall that if we have
say a which is the multiset 1125 and B is the
multi set 13 3 4 5 they might start using the
word em set instead of multi set a little bit
more often if these are all from em set 5 then a
plus B is the M set obtained just by combining the
elements here in the elements here so we count
how many ones there are all together there's
all together three ones there's all together
one two there's two threes a single four and
all together 25 that's the sum ok so now if we're
able to talk about the sum of two M sets then why
don't we define multiples of an M set as well why
don't we define to a to be just a plus a what you
get when you take the elements and double each one
of them so instead of having to ones we have four
so making a single to we have to tues instead of
a single five we have two fires and similarly 3b
it's naturally defined to be B plus B plus B
where we take the elements here and multiply
each of them by three so having two threes we have
six so having 14 we have three instead of 15 we
have five so this is a simple additional kind of
notation but it's very flexible that opens up a
whole new range of possibilities for us in terms
of writing down what multisets are so to be more
precise here's the official definition of what
a multiple of an amp set is and it's given in
terms of multiplicities of numbers so if a is
an M set from n K is a natural number plus then
k times a is the M set defined by the following
rule that the multiplicity of L in ka is just K
times the multiplicity of L in a and this should
hold true for all the elves in the correct range
in other words from 1 through n L of course a
natural number so this is saying that one number
at a time the number of times L appears in ka is
exactly K times the number of times it occurs in
a all right now we can check some Pleasant pretty
straightforward properties of this multiplication
multiplying a matrix by a number or a scalar
so if K and L are two natural numbers plus and
a and B are 2m sets from n then k times a plus b
is k times a plus K times B k plus L times a is
k times a plus L times a and here of course all
these plus signs are addition of em sets this is
namm said that's an M slit there's the addition of
em sets k times l times he's the same as K times
L times a and the special cases that one times
a is just a and 0 times a is the empty em set
when we multiply by zero than all the
multiplicities become zero so there's nothing
in it it's just the fdm set then you might like
to check these properties although they're pretty
obvious I hope so I suppose I've discussed before
with you the importance of notation in mathematics
from my point of view notation is probably the
single most important aspect of mathematics more
important than the definitions even which are more
important than theorems more important than proofs
notations really the the framework giving us the
structure of our the way our ideas can progress
so often even just an incremental increase in the
efficiency in our notation can have huge dividends
okay so we can now employ this slight increase in
generality and to give us a new way of thinking
about how to specify multisets or M sets so we're
talking about em sets from n here is an M set
a 1 1 1 1 2 3 35 3 12 for 153 okay so one way of
trying to organize this thing because it's getting
to be a little bit long it's not been ordered in
any way that's natural because the elements of an
M set are not naturally ordered but we could have
a look at the various numbers from 1 through say
five count how many ones there are so with the
multiplicity of 1 in this M set is 456 this six
of them there they are there and there's two twos
and I guess that's four threes a single four and
two fives so we could rewrite the original am set
as a sum of em sets this M set just consisting of
one's the right number ones this consisting
the right number of two's the right number of
three the right number four is the right number of
fives kind of separated the M set into its various
components and now with the notation that we've
just introduced we can more efficiently right what
this thing is this is just six times the M set
one here is two times the end sets 24 x 31 x 4
and 2 times 5 so here we have a new kind of way of
representing this original m set there's something
efficient about this that we're just recording the
various objects which occur in the M set together
with the corresponding multiplicities with which
they occur so let's note that the natural numbers
here are being used in two quite different
ways the numbers that are occurring inside
these brackets are actually the objects which
appear in the M set while the numbers which are
occurring outside is multipliers are counting the
number of times these objects appear so if we just
look at this six times the M set one this six is
a multiplicity corresponds to the letter K that we
were talking about this one is actually an object
corresponds to an l one of the Owls and the range
1 through n we're talking about an M set so we're
using natural numbers in two quite different ways
here in this notation it's very efficient isn't it
so if we call this sort of the multiplicity form
for our em set then the various operations that
we like to discuss the addition the Union and
the intersection in m7 are very easy to describe
in this form so for example if a happens to be
five times the M plus 2 times the M set 3 plus 1
times the M set for and B is say three times M set
1 plus 4 times the M set 2 plus 1 times M said
three plus two times the M set 5 these are both
m sets from five then if we want to form the sum a
plus B it's pretty easy we just add up the various
multiplicities so we get eight ones for tues there
aren't any twos in this 13 threes altogether two
of them here and one of them there 14 and two
fives while the Union a union B we just go through
the various multiplicities and take the union of
the various multiplicities know what's the max and
the multiplicities are laid out for us here so go
along a line so we don't actually have to go out
and count them they're just these coefficients
so the union of these two things will be well
the maximum 5 to 3 is 1 the max of four and 0 is
4 there'll be a 2 here because that's the maximum
of two and one they'll be a 1 here because one
is the maximum number fours and there will be a
2 here because that's the maximum number five and
similarly with the minimum a intersect B that'll
be the minimum of the various things so there'll
be 3 times 1 plus 1 x 31 x the M set three to
be exact so we just work with each multiplicity
separately okay well having done that we're going
to do a lot of these calculations and we're going
to stick inside em set 5 pretty soon the idea is
going to occur to as well why don't we just forget
about listing the M sets 1 2 3 4 & 5 all the time
it's always the same ones why don't we just record
the coefficients record the number of ones the
number of tubes the number of three is the number
four is number of lives in a given em set so we
could associate to this M set a yet another kind
of notational device the list of the coefficients
that all the various M sets have started with
em set one and then M set two and then m73 all
the way up to em set five and B would get the
list 3 4 10 20 because there are no M set forth
well if we did this then the operations would
even be simpler because now we have everything
organized exactly in the right spot we just take
the addition of the 2m sets it would just be the
addition of these two lists in the obvious sense
of adding five and three to get eight adding 0
and four to get for adding two and one to get 23
adding 10 to get one and adding 0 and two to get
to similarly taking the union will just be taking
the max at each stage and taking them intersection
would be taking the the intersection over the
minimum of the pairs at each stage so in terms
of operations this is also very attractive way of
thinking about how to represent an M set so it's
very interesting now we're opening our minds on
up here to the possibility of specifying amp set
in a different way that brings in the idea of
a list ok so we're connecting with our earlier
theory of lists but also in fact connecting with
our earlier theory of geometry because when we
were talking about I find one points not find two
points and such they really were just lists ok so
what's happening here so remember that an analyst
is something like this ok it's something that's
ordered with the commas and repetition is allowed
to noted by the square brackets so m1 com m to
come all the way up to say mm and each of the MIS
is a natural number in general okay so this is a
kind of a general end list now this kind of object
is now occurring in our theory so if we start with
an m set like this so here's an M set from 5 11
13 444444 55 belongs to M set theory all right
so associated to this thing here we can create a
list which is the multiplicity list of this the
number of times that one occurs the number of
times that two occurs three occurs for occurs
and five occurs the fact that we have five entries
here is a direct reflection of the fact that our M
set is from five so the length of the list here is
picking up the size of the N in our M set from n
so this gives us now kind of a new interpretation
of lists list like this at least if it has natural
number n trees have the possibility of
being interpreted in terms of multisets
so for example suppose we look at the list
four comma 3 i'm saying what is this thing
well until recently you would all said well this
isn't i find two point we've been talking a lot
about these things this is something that we
think about geometrically there's an X and Y
axis we have four over in this direction we go
three up in that direction we get at the point
4 comma 3 that's what this thing represents or
means it's referring to a geometrical object a
point in two-dimensional space okay but now we
see that that same list is intimately connected
with this particular em set an M set from to which
has four ones and three twos for ones and three 2s
so another answer to the question what is what
is this thing besides well it's a point another
possible answer is that it's an AM set or a
name for an M set an M set from two to being
the number of entries here it's generally kind
of an interesting thing when you can connect
different areas and some fashion doesn't
have to be very sophisticated even a very
simple connection can have sort of interesting
consequences because things that are obvious in
one setting may not be quite so obvious than
the other setting vice versa so this opens up
some new questions and new possibilities so I
supposedly embrace the idea of representing an
M set by its multiplicity list okay so here for
example here is an M set from four and here's
corresponding multiplicity list to one's 0
to s 13 and five fours okay once we've got
this correspondence in our mind well why not
also allow negative integral coefficients now
that we're talking about lists with natural
number n trees how about allowing negative
integer entries for example how about changing
is 0 2 a minus 1 what would that be well that
would correspond to an M set which had two ones
still 13 until five fours but now negative one
tues well accountants do think in this fashion
right and sometimes they use brackets denote
negative things in the balance sheet sometimes
maybe read things in red to denote debts debits
so there's this possibility of doing this and
then we have to contemplate the idea well okay
what does this mean at the level of multi sets
that we started with its may be more problematic
to think about what does it mean to have negative
one tues but at the level of this representation
it's not problematic at all so it opens up our
mind to the possibilities that maybe we should
be thinking about em sets a little bit more
generally after all I mean originally we had
the counting numbers and eventually someone had
the clever idea of introducing negative numbers
and the first people said well what does a
negative number what's minus 2 really mean
how is it possible to have minus two cows well
there is some way of thinking about what minus
two cows means as we learn in school it's maybe
not so natural and even until relatively recently
Descartes for example shied away from negative
numbers in terms of solutions to things still
now we're reasonably comfortable with negative
numbers as having some reasonable meaning in
accounting sense especially in an accounting
sense all right so if we're going to allow us
to contemplate counting with negative numbers
well why not contemplate data collections that
have certain objects occurring a negative number
of times it's not entirely unreasonable although
it probably wouldn't occur to us if we just stuck
with this way of representing the M sets okay so
it's a possibility that's really opened up here
because of this alternate way of writing down or
representing an M set it's an interesting idea
and there's another question that occurs what
about fractional multiplicities if we're going
to contemplate negative two cows how about half a
cow third of a cow what about say an M set one
half one quarter one third where we think of
this as being half of a one a quarter of a two
and a third of a three that would be very hard
to visualize or write down in a meaningful way
in this kind of notational system but with this
multiplicity list representational system
it's pretty simple to write down is it's
just all a fairy tale that's completely devoid
of applications well it turns out no it's not
so it's very closely connected with this idea
called fuzzy set theory and something that's
actually close to my interests the theory of hyper
groups which is a very interesting subject which
I'm hoping to tell you more about in the future
okay so we are approaching interesting alternate
ways of thinking about things by having a look
at the consequences of this alternate notation
for EM sets so it's worth pointing out that this
multiplicity list way of representing an M set is
not always more efficient the examples that I've
given you might suggest that but it's not always
the case so here for example is an M set from 15
to 22 7 12 777 and if we wanted to represent it
as a multiplicity list we'd have to say how many
times each of the numbers from 1 to 15 appears
so one appears 0 x 2 appears three times then 3
4 5 6 7 appears four times 8 9 10 11 12 appears
once 13 14 15 don't appear more extreme example
here is another m set from 15 15 15 okay that's
obviously going to have a rather redundant
multiplicity list okay so there's a trade-off
here depending on the nature of the kind of amp
set that you're considering but at least this
is an interesting alternative way of thinking
about things okay so speaking of alternative
ways of thinking about things next time I'm
going to introduce something even much more
dramatic in terms of rethinking our fundamental
notation this is a remarkable alternate way of
thinking about set theory that comes from Brazil
actually from some control engineers and so it's
often called a tropical calculus so does also
the max plus algebra so it exploits the idea
that we have this unusual kind of distributive
law between addition and union and that that
distributive law is really a lot like the more
familiar distributive law between multiplication
and addition that has all kinds of interesting
and quite unexpected consequences so next time
the tropical calculus I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
ha